---
title: 'Reasons'
date: 2020-09-12
permalink: /posts/2020/09a/reasons/
tags:
  -
---

Everything you have can be taken away,
Will be taken away.
Stolen from within your home,
Eaten by mold,
Washed away in the waters,
Atrophied from your negligence,
Sold off when the money was unexpectedly needed,
It will happen.

It will happen to every thing and it will happen to every one,
Every human,
Every life.
Everyone you know will lose everything.
Everyone you know will die.
The only way you avoid the pain of their death is by dying first yourself.

Give it to me fully,
Do not water anything down.
This is life,
And these are its preconditions.
Life eats life.
Life births life.
Destruction.
Creation.
Ad infimum.
Uroboros.
The snake is in the grass and I want to see it.
I want to stare into its cold, motionless eyes,
I want to see it indifferently assess my being with the flickering of its tongue.
I want to see how quickly I can be taken out,
or how effortlessly I can be spared.

It’s absurd, really.
Of all the ways it could have been, it’s this way.
I wasn’t, and now I am.
From nothing into something we are thrusted,
Without the great illusion of consent,
Onto this stage where we act out roles
Bounded by limitation and suffering
And we are painfully aware
Because the tears are real,
The blood is real.
Those are definitely real.

It’s no wonder people drink.
Anything to crawl back into the dark void,
The womb of oneness and nothing,
Where the duality of things doesn’t pound at your soul.
Where seeing can be traded for ignorance.
But desperate trading means you’ll lose the good things too,
Laughter,
Joy,
But it seems worth it,
Exciting even,
When you get to tell God what you really think of think of this.
A worthy act of rebellion against that which tethered the opposites together with a knot that can be cut but never untied.
No good. No evil. One.
No truth. No lies. One.
No better. No worse. One.

But it doesn’t work,
It never does.
Each time you awake from your drunken stupor,
The light shines its interrogating heat indiscriminately over your skin,
And you cannot shake the curse of the opposites because your very body casts the shadow that split the world apart.
So your escape was temporary,
You failed,
You’re back to the place with the problem,
The problem that you didn’t solve
And you’re no wiser, 
And no  you’re no stronger, 
Which makes you dumber and weaker.
Argue your way out of that,
Try,
Sure, it’s a spectrum,
But those are empty words attempting nothing but to absolve yourself of responsibility.
But the poles exist,
Any way not forward is backward.

It is not good that you are back here.
Everywhere you look is tragedy.
You cannot un-see the suffering.
Nothing happens when you close your eyes.
It’s still there.
And it’s too much for you to bare.
You can’t stay here.
You have to go somewhere else.

The duality of things.
The way you see, 
At least for now,
Presents two directions, two paths to get away.
Up or down.
Forward or backward.
Into the sky or into the earth.
Towards the light or towards the dark.
Either/or.

Backwards is easier,
We’ve already been over this.
All you need to do is let go.
Close your eyes.
Stop fighting.
Gravity pulls you down.
The earth will open up for you.
She welcomes the gift that you are.
She makes space for your body and you fall into
Her infinite darkness
surrounding you perfectly,
like water,
Neither warm nor cold,
Your vision fades,
Your memory fails,
Time no longer exists.
Nothing is,
So nothing isn’t.
You’ve returned.

To go this way is easy,
This is an understandable choice, 
Life is absurd and much of it is terrible,
But it is a dangerous choice.
It is death, and you know it.
Explicit suicide is killing what you are,
Implicit suicide is killing you could be.
The line dividing the two is not clear.

But you could go somewhere else.
You could go up and not down.
Gravity flows one way, yes,
And you’ll be working against it.
The handholds are sparse and slick
And when you slip,
Which will be often,
You will fall.
You will lose days worth of progress in seconds.

Even when the climbing is good,
Especially when the climbing is good,
When the handholds seem to pull you upwards,
Your fellow man will grab at your ankles and rip you down
because your progress scares them.
Your ascent illuminates their lowness,
And instead of praising your sacrifice,
They will mock your virtue,
They will wish you dead,
They will bury you so they do not have to see themselves.

But if you can make it past the instinctual weight of gravity,
If you can make it past the wriggling hateful hands,
If the loneliness of the journey doesn’t break your spirit,
And if you aren’t disillusioned by rigid expectations of what you will find,
Then you will see.

What you will see is exactly what was below you,
The same monsters that haunted your reality,
The same mobs that pulled you down
But from your vantage up high,
You will be able to peer onto the other side of things.
The light will illuminate the dimensions,
All things had more depth than you thought,
All things cast shadows.

The monsters have a vulnerable bellies and backsides they cannot protect.
The mobs are made of individuals,
Each just like you,
And they go home to their families and eat and love and cry.
The villains you despised and the heroes you loved are followed by shadows
And the shadows look the same.

In the beginning it was all good,
But you were naïve.
Then you became aware of the suffering, 
And you were cynical.
You see that you were clever to shed your naivety for cynicism, 
But you were a fool to stop there.
But instead of destroying yourself or everything around you,
Which you would have justified with ease,
You must go somewhere else,
But where?
Which way?

Climb!
It’s the only direction left to go,
Climb!
If you want to live,
Climb!
To evolve,
Climb!
To transcend,
Climb!
Because the only thing that is actually yours is the infinite capacity to transform suffering into meaning.

You saw and it was terrible and it is terrible,
But the solution to seeing terrible things is not to close your eyes,
The images burn into your mind and destroy you,
No,
The solution is to see more clearly,
To see further,
To see with perspective,
To see every side of every thing.
The terror will never go away,
But the beauty will reveal itself to you,
The complexity unravels into beauty which ties itself into complexity only to unravel itself back into beauty before tying itself again into complexity.

That’s how it is from up here.
But again,
You find yourself a traveler in a hostile land.
You’re of the air and the earth, not only of the air and not only of the earth.
The air is too thin, 
you need ground to stand on,
And you are alone.

You have to go back down,
But you get to keep what you saw,
If you are brave enough,
Because the mobs will hate you even more.
Love ultimately wins but it stokes the fires of hate like a fierce wind.
They’ll burn you alive if they get their hands on you.
Frightening.

You could lie,
Hide yourself from the hate by lying to yourself
By letting go of the wisdom you worked so hard to attain.
And if you convince yourself you’ll get back in,
Into the collective,
Into the Earth,
Into nothingness.

I would understand.
I can’t say with certainty I wouldn’t do the same.
The decision will constantly tempt you.
But with love and wisdom inside of you,
It can’t be touched, measured, or reduced,
But its real,
More real than things,
And it’s a force.
Your vision cuts through the chaos, and
Your words illuminate the darkness,
A better world for others to see.
Hopefully enough do, if you want to be kept off the burning stake,
At least for a little while.

So if you aren’t destroyed by the mob,
If you don’t give in to the temptation to sink back into nothingness,
And if you don’t trade your exhausting humility for effortless rigidity,
Then who knows how much better you can make things?
The poles have no observable limit,
so in theory,
It could get better forever.
You could do that.
You could make things better.
Better than they are now.
Better than they have ever been.
Perhaps this is a reason to endure the suffering.
Maybe it is the reason to endure the suffering,
And we need a reason,
I need a reason.







