title: 'Batman and Bonhoeffer'
date: 2020-11-15
permalink: /posts/2020/11/batman-and-bonhoeffer/
tags:
  -
---

### TLDR; 

	The Batman story, if we take it seriously enough, provides us with a rich source of moral content that can help us understand our ideals and ultimately, our actions. 

	I was never a fan of comic books. Sure, there are ample photographs of me wearing capes, but my childhood devotions to dinosaurs outcompeted any spare time I may have had to idolize super-heroes. As a result, my admiration for Christopher Nolan’s Batman adaptation carries zero nostalgia. Instead, I respectfully uphold the film not only as an entertaining piece of drama, but as a deserving contribution to the Western cultural canon. Sure, a trained art critic may scoff at the idea of placing so much value of something with so many explosions, and maybe they’re right, but I don’t care. The moral and psychological contents embedded within the story ignite too many questions to ignore.
	Such questions include; Why must the hero bear the weight of the entire world in a state of profound loneliness while the villain need only dissolve into existence? Or; Is the Batman narrative enough of a moral foundation to construct a meaningful life upon? I would like to explore these questions as I have time, but for now, I am most drawn to the following:

**Why does the Batman actively choose to let the Joker live when he has several chances to kill him?** In trying to understand this theme, I will explore three ideas:

-	The divinity of the individual
-	The fallibility of mortally bound judgement
-	The paradox of Bonhoeffer

Hopefully, this exploration will prove useful and expose nuggets of gold hidden within our moral landscape, existing without our awareness until excavated, sifted, smelted and polished. 

### A brief note on stories

	If you’re skeptical on the value of stories and the billions of dollars we elect to spend on Batman (and other super-hero) films doesn’t convince you, consider the following. The world is complicated and its never clear how we should act. To solve this problem, we create stories and have our characters represent different ideals, giving them the power to actually enact a moral principle. In our current case of whether or not evil should be killed when found manifest, I, a mere mortal, cannot answer that question because I don’t have the capability to carry out the task. It would be like asking an untrained weakling on the value of violence instead of a heavyweight boxer. The former would likely proclaim undeserved righteousness for physical restraint, ignoring the fact that their virtuous pacifism stems their inability to create violence. This isn’t helpful.
With all his gadgetry, skill, ‘fuck you money’, and identity-protection, the Batman is a modern day miracle worker, a man-god. Like the Queen on a chess board, he has unequaled freedom to traverse our proposed problem-space in any direction. However, underneath the façade, he is still a man whose judgement faculties are corrupted by love, desire, limited perception, and fear of his own mortality. Owing to this duality, he is uniquely capable of shaping the world to his intents and non-uniquely capable of screwing it up. This makes his symbol an ideal tool for the valuation of moral currency. This is helpful. 


# The divinity of the individual

	The Batman had multiple chances to kill the Joker, but he doesn’t. This is confusing, because the Joker, who perfectly embodies the effects of nihilism on the human psyche, was responsible for untold destruction. On the surface, this is a kindergarten level trolley problem. Obviously, he should kill the living incarnation of evil and save a hospital full of vulnerable children. How could this not be clear? However, to the Batman, the only one who seriously grasped the power to take the Joker out, strategic clarity is lost. In fact, the Batman found this decision so murky that in one reckless scene, he nearly voluntarily killed himself instead. 
	I posit that one driver behind Batman’s paradoxical pacifism is the divinity of the individual. At the core of Batman’s moral software sits a class that assigns infinite redeemability to each human life, regardless of the contextual parameters such a life may carry. According to this idea, one can murder, rape, steal, or even be the perfect representation of destructive evil that the Joker is, yet their life still has value. This begs the question, where does the value come from?  Matter contains no inherent instructions for its proper valuation, so value must come from a subjective source, our individual and collective mind (culture). Logic is one of our only tools to traverse the opaque mess of subjectivity, but it appears completely illogical that all life should be valued. Despite this paradox, we mostly act as if we believe the divinity of the individual concept to be true. Why?
I believe the reason stems from the idea that people are not good or evil as the Manichean’s preached, but they are good and evil. Even if the soul is bathed in dark, sticky corruption, a miniscule ember of goodness may still persist, requiring only the gentle input of forgiving breath to be ignited. This idea concludes that enduring the refuse from the most heinous among us is worth their redemption. More so, a chasm of evil exists within the hearts of the best of us. If we don’t notice our own evils, someone else will. If our cultural solution to evil is to kill it, genocide would wipe us out and suicide would fill in the gaps.
Another idea may be that we simply have no idea what each life is capable of. Each new infant could be another Stalin and create hell on earth for millions. However, they could also be the product of Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King in one humanitarian. This is a risky proposition. No one can say for certain that the chance for good is worth the potential for evil. Despite final understanding, we, at this moment in time in non-totalitarian Western society, tend to place our money on the chance for good. Wherever some semblance of democracy reigns, so does this idea.
This idea is not uniquely attributed the Batman. Morality has been evolving for millennia as we’ve had to deal with more and more complex societal phenomena.  In the West, the Commandments may have been the first articulation of such an idea, eventually culminating in the symbol of Christ presenting the proper locus of Godliness to be within each individual, regardless of that individual’s history, social position, or their suite of protected classes. As any adaptation evolved over time, it probably persisted because it worked. Wielding such an adaptation, albeit clumsily, may have cultures allowed some cultures to outcompete others that siloed divinity within select individuals, like the fallen Pharaoh-centric dynasties of Egypt. Of course, this is an ideal we often fail to grasp enact. One need not look carefully to discover countless genocides of “otherized” groups who had their divinity stripped away to justify their erasure. Yes, actions are more important than ideals, and this ideal may be too lofty for us mortals to grasp. However, the fact that our culture increasing converges upon this particular ideal testifies to its importance.
To many, artifacts colored by organized religion are often viewed as a stain. This is understandable as many dogmatic and sometimes hypocritical axioms are difficult to accept in a fully postmodern world. This is what is so interesting about the phenomena. In its own way, the Dark Knight contributes to our cultural convergence towards the divine individual in a sort of abstract, non-institutional evangelization. It represents a deeply religious, probably most specifically Christian ideal, and is adored by those who balk at such institutions. Perhaps we are just ignorant to our hypocrisies. However more likely, this ideal is one we deeply value and want to consume, we just need the story told with modern relevance and less dogma to find it palatable. I’m generally hesitant of our naïve attempts to intentionally extract only certain threads from complex religious tapestries, but perhaps this value abstraction is what the front lines moral evolution looks like.
It should also be noted that this idea appears to be deeply irrational. Depending on the extent of the atrocity committed, maybe the world would be objectively better if the offender was killed. It definitely seems like a world where Hitler or Stalin were swiftly assassinated would have been a far better one. However, given the perfect shot under flawless cover and impenetrable protection, would you have taken a lethal shot at either of these men? Would it have been the right thing to do? I don’t think I could answer with any amount of certainty and I don’t think you could either. This introduces the next concept the Batman symbol presents in his inability to destroy the Joker, the fallibility of mortal judgement.

# The fallibility of mortal judgment

	Assuming a rational actor wants to optimize chances of social cohesion, personal wealth, and not dying, we do a lot of irrationally destructive things. We get drunk and then operate 2,000 pound projectiles down busy streets, we blow mysteriously-adulterated cocaine off of gas station bathroom toilet seats, we embezzle public funds to buy gifts for our mistresses even though we know our every action is scrutinized, and at the deepest level, we bite the hand that feeds. We always have and always will do these things. Its understandable. So long as the price of existence is unbearable suffering, the immediate satisfaction of desire is a constant temptation. What isn’t so immediately understandable is when we do, or idolize, irrationally (read: unable to deduce the progression of action to result via logical tools) sacrificial things for the sake of a better world. The Batman’s restraint for killing the Joker is one of those things.
	As the joint arbiter of justice and sacrificial lamb of Gotham, you would think the Batman would make the simple calculation of 1 versus thousands of lives, bear the burden of dirtying his hands for the collective, shoot the guy and just be done with it. Who cares if murder is technically illegal? He’s the Batman and he could just fly away to some hidden waterfall cave on a Lucius Fox aircraft some and later reemerge wearing a signature poorly fitting suit to pilot a Polynesian yacht full of supermodels as the quintessential douchebag of Bruce Wayne’s public persona. At points throughout the film, he appears to want to do such a thing as his divine-individual software is temporarily overridden by hatred. However, such fits of passion are always met with deep cognitive dissonance followed by reluctant disarmament. Such a phenomena represents an adjacent cornerstone in our moral foundation, the fallibility of mortal judgement. 
The Batman appears to know that he is not above the same judgement-corrupting vices that hamper us all. He is keenly aware that what he thinks is right for him and now may not be right for all and later. With a little inspection, this is not surprising. Recall our thought experiment of assassinating Hitler or Stalin. I wager you still have no certainty on whether this would be the right thing to do. The cool rationalists of the modern world would probably say they do, and maybe you’re one of them, but I generally don’t believe people who claim to be completely rational. The fact that such a question is not immediately answerable implies something. Somewhere deep within cultural values and perhaps embedded in our nervous system, another piece of code sits that makes us question our ability to trust our judgements. Such mysterious sources of influences demand articulation and I offer one such. Revenge and justice operate on different horizons and we don’t know that we know this.
Revenge and justice are both available solutions to a problem in the same way gasoline and water are both liquids. The difference is what happens when we pour them on a flame. For example, let’s say the Allies got Hitler before he killed himself. Revenge over Hitler would be killing him for what he did. Such an act would probably be cause for immediate celebration. Maybe that celebration would last years, even decades. However, killing such a man in his prime would award him with martyrdom. Death in his prime means immortality in his prime. Remembered as such, he could always be recalled for inspiration to certain groups fall victim to such ways of thinking.
Justice may also be taking his life, I don’t know, but it could also be putting him up to fair trial followed by a life sentence. If done conscientiously, we would have had a chance to all be in agreement about exactly what he did and where it led to. Then, given a life sentence instead of execution, any chance of martyrdom would be eliminated as the once powerful figure would be reduced to a sickly old man. Such a two-punch combination could make any intellectual support for his work unforgivable and leave behind no symbol to emulate, potentially making such poisonous ideologies less competitive in the future marketplace of ideas. Considered over decades or even centuries, this approach could yield a significant net positive result.  
More concretely, the Batman shows us that destruction is not the way to deal with antagonists. This applies to symbolic Lucifer characters just as much as it does to those we disagree with about anything. The solution to offense isn’t returning the offense to the offender. Such acts of revenge will always make things worse to which there is no limit. Instead, the Batman symbolizes a different path to take. He doesn’t go as far as Christ in demanding forgiveness, which is so difficult that its almost unattainable. However, he does advocate transcending revenge by turning the offender over to the mutual judgement of the collective in hopes that some amount of justice can be extracted.

### The paradox of Bonhoeffer

	I think we’ve laid out some useful propositions, which are summarized as below:

-	Each individual should be treated as if they have infinitely redeemable (divine) value.
-	It may be optimally useful to consider that our individual judgements are corrupted by the constraints of mortality and that we should:
    -	Favor justice over revenge if we seek improve a problem
    -	Whenever possible, make decisions collectively with caution instead of individually with passion

As tempting as it may be to inscribe any potentially useful moral values in stone, we must be careful to not dogmatize them. Morality is ugly. There are no elegant models like there are in physics. The above propositions are great, but they were written today. Tomorrow will be different and the rules may demand update. 
This notion of contending with dogma is what I most appreciate about Dietrich Bonhoeffer, whom oddly my brain sorts into the same class of people. Bonhoeffer was a 20th century German theologian who for much of his life preached on the essentialism of pacifism, as was in line with Christian dogma. However, as the Nazi’s rose to power, Bonhoeffer was presented a choice. Do nothing and remain in hypocritical safety and maybe offer non-violent criticisms towards the party and Hitler from afar, or break his commitment to pacifism, accept the potential stain of blood on his hands and try to assassinate Hitler. With great cognitive dissonance, he chose the latter, and it cost him his life. His attempts failed, but they came very close and he could have dramatically influenced global history. Regardless, he is remembered as a brave leader who heroically balanced the essential task of simultaneously bolstering our traditions of yesterday and updating them to today.
In introducing Bonhoeffer, I have no interest in justifying or criticizing his actions. Rather, I offer his story as a reminder that whenever we are truly trying to improve the world, we must walk the tightrope that he and the Batman walked. Our collective cultural canon holds a deep well of tremendous moral value. The Dark Knight is down there. The Sermon on the Mount is down there. Dostoevsky’s “Grand Inquisitor” is down there. We can and should draw from this well as we try to do the right thing, whatever that means. However, it is crucial that we carefully inspect the narratives we pull up and clearly abstract out the values, as we tried in this essay. Only in doing so can we attempt the necessary task of deciding what to use, what to update, and what to discard. The Batman is such a valuable resource because he shows us how to do this and with the help of explosions and sweet grappling hooks, we all watch. With any hope, our billions of dollars we’ve invested in this franchise yield us more Bonhoeffer’s, our true heroes.






 
